{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;\red13\green63\blue129;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\b\fs52 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Printmaking 101: Monotype vs Monoprint\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
First, it should be noted that throughout history the 2 terms, monoprint and monotype, have been used interchangeably. But no more.\
In today\'92s post-modern world where sometimes it appears that things are moving away from specific rules, the terms monoprint and monotype have actually become more specific and have come to refer to 2 different, though admittedly similar, types of prints.\
Let\'92s start with their similarities. The most obvious is that both a monotype and a monoprint involve the transfer of ink from a smooth non non-absorbent surface made of, say, metal, glass or polycarbonate, to paper, canvas or some other artist-selected surface. Another similarity is that both involve the use of a press often with a metal roller applying pressure to the back of the paper which transfers the ink from the plate to the paper or canvas. That\'92s about where the similarities end.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b\fs44 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Monotypes\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Let\'92s first define each print staring with the monotype. The monotype is actually a very simple medium that only requires applying pigments or ink to the smooth substrate plate. The plate for a monotype is a blank smooth surface that has no permanent markings or incisions.\
Picture a painting on a piece of smooth acrylic. This image on the smooth surface is created by applying the ink. It can be brushed, rolled, daubed or applied in any way that suits the artist. The artist may further manipulate the ink before a sheet of paper is applied on top of the image. This plate with the paper applied on top is then run through the press. What is created is a unique one-of-a-kind work on paper.\
So here\'92s the question we are frequently asked at this point in the explanation: why doesn\'92t the artist avoid all this rigamarole involving the plate and press and just paint directly on the paper?\
Simply put, our answer is that the monotype can have remarkable transparency combined with a layered quality that one is unlikely to get from a painting on paper. Also many of the monotype artists we work with have told us they enjoy the element of surprise that comes with lifting the paper off the plate after it has gone through the press. One is never quite sure what the print will look like. Sometimes they can, of course, be disappointed but, as one of our artists elegantly puts it, there can also be some \'93happy accidents\'94. The numbering of monotypes is usually left to the discretion of the artist. Some chose to number them 1/1 while others artists prefer to avoid any numbering at all.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b\fs44 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Monoprints\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The monoprint, unlike the monotype, is one of a series, so it is not completely unique. The monoprint begins with an etched plate, unlike the smooth plate of the monotype. The image on this etched plate is the underlying image of all monoprints in the series. It is a constant that is common to each print in the series. The artist adds different pigments and designs on the consistent image of each print that is pulled. Monoprints are often thought of as variations on one theme. The theme, of course, is the sustained etched image that is on all prints. The variations are endless. Each print has something unique. The series of monoprints has a limited number of prints and each is numbered.\
So, there you have our distilled explanation of the differences and similarities between monotypes and monoprints. We could have been much more technical, but the purpose of this blog is to provide you with a very basic explanation. Think of it as \'93monotype/monoprint 101\'94.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\f1\fs44 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Monoprint and Monotype\
\pard\pardeftab720

\fs21\fsmilli10800 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\fs26\fsmilli13200 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc0 Monoprint\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \'a0and\'a0\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul Monotpye\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \'a0are generally considered the most painterly printmaking processes. \'a0In a way, you are printing a painting. \'a0They are non-\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul editionable\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone  prints because the images and lines usually cannot be exactly reproduced and no two prints end up being perfectly alike. \'a0The beauty of this medium is in its\'a0spontaneity and its combination of printmaking, painting and drawing media.\'a0\'a0The process offers an opportunity to explore\'a0color separations\'a0and\'a0transitions, hand rubbing, mark making, tone, texture, and \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul chiaroscuro\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone  with the potential to produce imagery from bold to ethereal. \'a0\
\
Monotypes and monoprints\'a0are different. \'a0Monotype is a\'a0\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul planographic\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \'a0process. \'a0The \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul matrix\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone , or plate, is flat and featureless. \'a0This means it contains nothing (such as etched or engraved lines) that will pass on any characteristics to the prints. Because there are no permanent features on the plate, all imagery relies on the artist working with the ink to create one distinctive print. \'a0At most two similar\'a0\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul impressions\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone \'a0can be \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul pulled\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ulnone . \'a0\
\
With\'a0monoprinting stencils may be used or the matrix may be\'a0carved or otherwise manipulated so that it can be reused to produce similar but not identical results. \'a0Most printmakers eventually discover monoprinting on their own, usually when the ink in an editionable print does something unexpected and interesting or through happy accidents during clean up. \'a0There are many monoprinting techniques, including collage, stenciling, hand-painted additions, and a form of tracing in which thick ink is laid down, paper is placed on top and is then drawn on, transferring the ink onto the paper.\'a0 Monoprints can also be made by altering the type, color, and pressure of the ink used to create different prints. \'a0Multiple layers can be printed at once or in a sequence. \'a0Various processes can be combined to make a single print. \'a0\
\
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://monoprints.com/"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Monoprints.com}}\'a0and "{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.waterbasedinks.com/newsletters/newsletterhist.html"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What is a monotype?}}" are also helpful websites. \'a0\
\
A lot of mono printing happens at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.crowsshadow.org/pages/home"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Crow's Shadow Institute}}\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
,\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www2.thorn.net/~izabel/10GrandPress/aboutArtists.html"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
10 Grand Press}}\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'a0and the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.mgne.org/MemberGallery.shtml"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Monotype Guild of New England}}. \'a0Some artists who have made mono prints are {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://joycesilverstone.com/"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Joyce Silverstone}},\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://mateogalvano.com/portfolio.cfm?nK=8185&nS=0&i=92269"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mateo Galvano}},\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.tworiversprintmaking.com/Two%20Rivers%20Printmaking%20Studio%20Artist%20Images/Top/default.htm"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lynne Barton}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://tamarind.unm.edu/editions/brice_d_img.html"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Daniel Brice}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://tamarind.unm.edu/editions/whitehorse_img.html"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Emmi Whitehorse}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://tamarind.unm.edu/editions/jqts-img.html"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Jaune Quick-to-see Smith}}, and\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://angelamalchionno.com/section/76484.html"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Angela Malchionno}}.\
\
Start looking through the websites under Online Resources\'a0for printmaker artist influences.\'a0 The {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ifpda.org/content/artists"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
IFPDA}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.davidsongalleries.com/cpdc.php"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Davisdson Galleries}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://tamarind.unm.edu/printinventory.html"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Tamarind Institute}}, and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.tandempress.wisc.edu/artists.html"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Tandem Press}}\'a0are good sites to start with as they have pretty a broad range of artists. \
\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.printeresting.org/"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Printeresting}}\'a0is a good website for keeping up with the oddball goings on in the world of contemporary printmaking.\
\
The point of this assignment is that you should learn what you can do with the ink, how the presses work, how to work without making a big mess, and how to clean up the shop properly.\
}